Are you there Charlie?
Yeah, I'm here bro.
Okay, great.
I guess now to get back on track.
Signal's still good.
Chronologically, yeah.
Okay, the Catalyst.
And you've mentioned a little bit about that.
Again, it's a patent on all your story,
kind of your new style.
And it reminded me a little bit of the rose
in that it had this unfinished musical piece in it.
Music must mean a lot to you
to write about it so much.
Yeah, I love it.
I cannot play an instrument,
but I've great many of my stories,
at least in recent years,
have music plays a part in it.
In fact, sometimes the plot turns on it.
I had a funny one in analog, H-Tech.
I don't know whether you read that or not.
Yes, I've read it.
Well, you may recall there that the guy
deliberately went to hell
so that he could sit on the burning shores
and watch the blue flames
in the burning brimstone.
Because all of that,
all the forgotten and unfinished music
of the entire world had been sent there.
And he particularly wanted to hear
Beethoven's 10th Symphony,
which Beethoven never got to write,
except in bits and pieces.
And also Schubert's Unfinished part,
Schubert's Unfinished Symphony was there,
and several other things.
So, of course, I had to work in a patent angle
and a legal angle to make it saleable,
but that was the guts of it.
Just watching the flames turn out
all this wonderful music.
And then the Venetian court,
one of the critical things,
turns on Tchaikovsky's Fourth Symphony,
the opening chords, the fate thing.
And, well, there are other things,
but the young love music.
Oh, I should mention another thing.
The catalyst, at one time, was a general novel,
really about my brother Billy,
really about me and my mother,
and life in Fort Worth,
and life in the Red Light District,
and life in the police department.
And one of the stories there involved
a peculiar whistle,
which was derived from
Tchaikovsky's Safely Graze by Johann Sebastian Bach.
But that long version never sold,
and I thought, well, I'm not going to let it die.
I will convert it to a science fiction book
with all the proper trappings
and things you need to call it science fiction,
which I did, but I couldn't put in Bach.
So I put in this thing about the opera
and the unfinished,
well, it was an unfinished opera,
what do you want,
and the prophet, and so on.
So music was there too.
The only biographical information I've ever seen on you
was in Damon Knight's Orbit 4,
and it said something about working in a police department
and something about a Red Light District and all that.
So that must be, I guess that's the only thing that's known about you
other than what we're finding out right now.
Well, yeah, my first job was in the Red Light District in Fort Worth.
I worked there for three years, three very happy years.
And I never availed myself of the facilities
of the young ladies up the street,
but I knew they were there,
and I said good morning to them,
and they said good morning to me,
and the corner house, the big house of the main madam
had a little sandwich shop.
They had the cleanest and best food in the area,
so all the boys in the warehouse went up there for their lunch,
including me.
So there it was, and it was a lot of fun.
And the police department, similarly,
I worked for them for a year in the Fingerprint Bureau,
and that was an education.
Did you finish your undergraduate degree at TCU by any chance?
No, here's what happened there, Bill.
My first couple of years there were at night,
and I had a ministerial scholarship in the Bright College of the Bible.
And as I may have mentioned to you,
we parted company, at least the Bright College, and I did,
but I went back anyhow on another scholarship,
and I took some more work in the daytime,
and I worked at the police department at night.
Then I moved to Washington,
and I did get my BS in chemistry from George Washington University,
and that was in 1942,
and in 1946 I got my LLB in law and passed the bar,
and all of this was part-time work,
and it took me a while to get it.
So I did not get a degree at TCU,
but I met my wife there,
and I met her in high school in Fort Worth,
and she and I went to TCU together.
We rode the same bus every once in a while,
and it was understood that when I came to Washington
that we would get married as soon as possible, which we finally did.
And that's part of history.
I'm glad I asked about that,
although it got me off the track on the catalyst,
I'll get back on, but that's fascinating.
The thing I liked about the catalyst,
one of the things was that you showed the day-to-day operation of an R&D unit,
both from the research scientist point of view and the lawyer's point of view.
Most science fiction books always look at the head of the department
or the brilliant young researcher that doesn't have these kinds of day-to-day problems,
not only technical problems, but political problems as well.
So you must have felt right at home when you were writing that with your background.
Yes, I saw it all happen.
I changed the names, of course, except for one.
The hero was a man that I knew very well, a brilliant man, a great chemist.
His real name was John Stone Sennott Mackay.
Of course, in the book I call him John Stone Sinclair Serene,
but he was a real man and he was the inventor.
And he got all the things done to him that were mentioned there,
and he did leave, but he made this marvelous invention.
Meanwhile, and it did get into Interference.
None of the other characters were real at all.
The bad guys, they were not the same ones that did things to him.
Speaking of which, how did your peers in industry take your writing?
Let's say later on at this time, whenever these patent lawyer stories came out,
did the people at Grace Reed it and your friends and acquaintances read it,
and how did they react to it?
Well, they read it all right there, but they didn't know just how to react.
They would say, I read your story and then wait until I was going to say something,
but I wouldn't say anything.
I read your book.
The catalyst, I guess, of all of these excited the most reaction.
I had calls from all over the place, all over the country, asking about it.
Am I in it?
I'd say, no, you're not in it.
Especially from Connecticut, and people who were on that program, but at long-century times.
And of course, Johnny MacIus, bought dozens of copies and circulated them all over the country.
He's dead now.
He's got a cancer of the jaw.
So there was a reaction, but nobody complained about it.
One of my neighbors here in the little development where I live, asked me,
I was still working for Grace after that, and I said, yeah, they know I'm going to retire next year,
so they just are going to wait for a lot.
Maybe they'll do.
Okay, next came Firebird, which was, again, I call it a throwback just for lack of a better word,
but it was back in your old style, although as we talked about it, it uses the more modern cosmology.
And again, you kind of concluded that the universe is sentient,
and I guess that was the mystical part of this.
And you also pulled off the biggest rebirth in your career because you had the whole universe,
the whole big bang to worry about now.
Yeah, well, I'm sure you recognize the basic story here.
This is Tristan and his shoulder.
I don't know whether you go in for Wagner or not, but it is his shoulder and Tristan drinking,
what she thinks is the poison drink, but it's his lovely lecture again, and they fall in love.
And after that, just about everything parallels the Tristan and his shoulder story,
as you would find it in Wagner's opera, including Death at the End, and the flight.
Well, I'll change it a little bit.
In the beginning, when I first wrote David Hartwell's pocket book, I should mention he is a medieval scholar.
This is what he got his PhD in English in.
And he was quite familiar with the Tristan legend from there, and he found Welsh origins for it,
and he hadn't changed the names, they look like Welsh names.
And he said, make him more of a Renaissance knight, while putting some chuffs, which is easy enough,
or something that looked like a chuffkin.
I worked it into the plot, it came out okay.
But it is a never-contempt, and they'll still make their contribution.
That spawns another question.
I keep saying I only have two more questions, but it spawns another one.
Chess has appeared quite notably, especially in the short stories.
I assume you're a fan of the game.
Well, I've played at least another year, I believe.
And I still do.
I read a book of chess combinations nearly every night.
It puts me to sleep.
Various brilliances of some of the past masters.
It's an exciting thing.
I used to play a lot more than I do now.
We used to have a chess club back at Sinomidd, and also one at Grace.
But these things have long gone.
I do love the game, and there are occasions when I can work it into a story,
and if I can find one, I will.
Okay, then the Venetian court.
The Venetian court appeared as a short story, and then, I guess, later as a fix-up.
This was the first, as a fix-up to a novel.
This was the first time I'd noticed that you'd done that, written a short story,
and then extended to the novel.
It was really sort of a travel-ep.
I would say about 40,000 words as it appeared in analog, and then I expanded it to 60,000.
So, certainly it was expanded.
It was changed a little bit, but basically it's the same thing.
And it is the first time I've done anything like that.
It is based on a novel from a prior work.
Okay, tell me what you're working on now, if you have any plans for publishing in the near future.
Well, I have some items circulating right now, and I'm not working on anything right now.
I'm going to take it easy for a few weeks.
The things that I have circulating, I have a novel, science fiction novel,
which has been turned down at least once, and I don't know whether it will ever sell.
This has to do with the impact of a religion founded on Edgar Allen's poem,
and its impact on an alien invasion from another galaxy.
And that one, or it's called The Raven, it's of course based on the soul of the Raven.
But that one is, as you say, a pick-up.
It's a big expansion of a short story which I've sold to Harlan Ellison to be published in Glass Dangerous Visions.
How long ago was that?
This was 1970, oh, it's the 75 or 76th. He hasn't published it.
Yeah, so I noticed.
But I didn't want it to go to waste, so I expanded it to this thing, which may never be published either.
Then I have one, two, three, four short stories.
One deals with computers, one deals with Robert E. Lee and a visitor from the future.
One deals with, let me think, just a little examination of muscular physics and falling down a well truck.
And one, I just sent out last Saturday, the day before yesterday.
Let me see, what is it about?
My memory is failing me, Bill. I don't know what is, kind of, anything.
Oh yeah, it has to do with a system for disposing of nuclear waste into one of the planets, the solar system.
And it's a little exciting. I had to work out the physics of escaping from the moon of Jupiter.
So we'll see how that one goes.
Okay, I'm glad to hear that you're still putting things out. I look forward to it.
Let me ask you this then. How do you want to be remembered as a science fiction writer?
What do you want people to remember about your work?
My request there is, please forget me, let me sink into oblivion, let the waves wash up over the sand, and everything is a book.
Honest to God.
Okay. Do you ever wish that you could have done it full time?
Had the inherited money or something so you didn't have to worry about making bacon?
Did you enjoy your other work enough that the writing as a pastime was satisfying?
Yeah, I write my other work. It was a lot of fun being a patent attorney, working with inventors that really knew their stuff,
and taking what they invented and getting it down into English and borrowing it with a patent office, battling with a patent office to get the patent.
That was fun. And I don't think I would want to trade that for a professional life of writing science fiction.
Whether it were that way. Now, writing science fiction is work. The other is not.
Okay. That as far as my list of questions, that's it. I can't tell you enough how much I enjoyed it and that you consider to be interviewed.
Well, I'm always glad to talk to anybody that's interested in stuff I've written.
Oh, I am. Let me ask you a favor, which please feel free to turn down if you'd rather not do it. May I send you my books to be autographed?
I will send the postage and all that good stuff. Would that be any problem?
I would be happy to do it.
Oh, I thank you. That will...
You might get a little indication of what you would like me to say.
Okay. I do appreciate that. That would mean very much to me. I have been a fan of yours for... Well, I'm only 34, so I can't be that long.
But ever since I found the Ring of Riternal in 1971 or so, then I found the Rose. And I've read the Rose probably eight times.
And I don't have time to read...
You're over-daggered.
Well, I still get something out of it. It just really means a lot to me. And I don't have the luxury of reading anything more than once.
I don't read anything else once, but I read that about once every year just to get it again. I wish it would get back in print.
I've got a whole bunch of copies of it, but I don't lend them to friends.
Well, okay. I'm very gratifying to see if it meant something to somebody.
It very much did. Charlie, thanks again. It's been really great. And you take care and keep on writing. Look forward to seeing what you put out.
Okay, Bill.
And I'll get you my books pretty quick, and I sure appreciate that.
Okay.
Bye-bye now.